# 4. Most probably you need a database for the Django Project

## **To use MySQL with this Django App:**

_(For a very detailed “How to install MySQL 8 on Windows Server 2016” see my other post.)_

1. Download the MySQL installer from here: [https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/installer/](https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/installer/)
2. I prefer downloading the larger package listed here. I find it better to have a full snapshot of the installer used during setup. The latest version, at the time of this writing, is MySQL 8.0.15 (MySQL 8.0.11 has known bugs!). The smaller \~15MB file eventually downloads the main MySQL installer while finishing the steps.
3. Double-click MySQL 8 from the executable `.msi` file.
4. Goto custom settings and select the Python connector.
5. Set up a root password (Make a note of the Password at a safe place).
6. Login to MySQL as superuser: `mysql -u <superuser> -p`
7. Create Database: `CREATE DATABASE mydatabase CHARACTER SET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_unicode_ci;`
8. Create a DB User with Password:\
   `mysql> CREATE USER '<DATABASE_USER>'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY '<DATABASE_PASSWORD>';`
9. Grant permissions to user for the database:
10. `mysql> GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON <DATABASE_NAME>.* TO '<DATABASE_USER>'@'localhost';`
11. Then, if you have a MySQL dump file, import the database into MySQL: `mysql -u DATABASE_USER_ID -p <DATABASE_NAME> < db_dump_file.sql`
12. If you don’t have a MySQL database dump file, initialise a fresh set of database tables (See the following section).
13. Make sure the Django Projects `settings.py` file contains the settings to connect to the MySQL database (See: [https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.1/ref/settings/#std:setting-DATABASES](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.1/ref/settings/#std:setting-DATABASES))

_(Optionally you can set up PhpMyAdmin to manage the MySQL database via UI.)_

_(Note: In my testing, I found that MySQL was rather slow on Windows, so do consider the Database choice well. That’s beyond the scope of this article but I encourage you to research it a bit.)_

_(Note: The steps for PostgreSQL would be similar, with minor changes to the commands.)_



## **To use SQLite3 with this Django App:**

It’s quite simple to work with SQLite3, as you don’t have to configure the Database Name, DB User, Password, etc.

Just download a pre-compiled SQLite3 binary from [https://sqlite.org/download.html](https://sqlite.org/download.html). Make sure sqlite is in your PATH variable.

Then, you simply need the SQLite3 database file and make sure the Django Projects `settings.py` file contains the settings to connect to the Sqlite3 database ([https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.1/ref/settings/#std:setting-DATABASES](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.1/ref/settings/#std:setting-DATABASES)) or initialise a fresh SQLite3 database using the following steps.



## **To Initialise Fresh Tables in the Database (if a database dump isn’t available):**

1. Activate Virtual Environment
2. cd into the project code directory.
3. Generate migration files for all your Django Apps one by one`python manage.py makemigrations <your_django_app-1>python manage.py makemigrations <your_django_app-2>` etc.
4. Run the migrate command, which runs the migration scripts generated in previous step. `python manage.py migrate`
5. Create a superuser account. Make a note of the username/Password. `python manage.py createsuperuser`

<br>
